You guys ready some language
creator.
I have further to introduce
Carol Willey.
She is a python during counseling
Project Jupiter Steering Council
member.
She blends the strings of pythonic.
Jupiter notebook's to improve access
to learning and education
due to the worldwide foundation of
the Pyfrom language.
The hard work of the Jupiter team
users worldwide.
Carroll was awarded the Twenty
Seventeen ACM Software System
Award, recognizing the lasting
influence of Jupiter, a broad
collaboration to develop its open
source tools for interactive
computing with a language agnostic
design.
Thank you.
Welcome, everybody, for being here.
It is my absolute
pleasure to share this evening.
You and some
of the people that actually
influenced my career in software
development.
So let's get through this.
And for those of you that are
watching us on the lifespan.
Hello and welcome and
hope you have a wonderful evening
with us.
We haven't really distinguished
panel of language creators.
And I'd like to invite them to the
stage as we read
their bios. I'm going to keep the
bios really short because
I think most of them need no
introduction whatsoever.
And that'll save us some
time more.
Do you see language design
stuff? OK.
So first we have been
Rassam
to develop the Python language that
touches pretty much every
corner of society today in some
way.
And it's.
He's the creator of Java,
which is UK-EU, used across a
broad variety of devices and
deployments at scale.
Well done.
And please get a.
Childcare has architected
a number of languages over the past
several decades, including
Turbo Pascal, Delphi,
C-sharp, and so you might know this
little language typescript.
Definitely not these.
Larry Wall to combined
his unique perspective on
text and computing with
his strong background in linguistics
to Craig Pearl and its
sister sibling Pearl 6.
Welcome.
So just a couple of
housekeeping things about this
evening's format.
You're in for an engaging
and hopefully very lively
discussion. More likely than we were
at dinner.
I think that's possible, right?
OK.
The format.
More beer.
OK. We can do that.
Keep it coming.
OK. So the format will be
two sessions with a fifteen minute
intermission.
What I'll do is I will start by
asking one of the panelists a
question, and hopefully
a response will be like one to two
minutes and then kind of throw
it open for other panelists to
respond and hopefully get
a really good discussion going.
And the more you discuss, the
less I have to ask questions and
the more in-depth we can go
on the really cool stuff
after the 15 minute intermission.
We're going to take
questions from the audience over
a winner
Twitter.
OK. So tweet out your questions.
Hashtag is happy bbf
out.
And if you can get those
in by 8:00, we'll kind of collect
them and
have some really great audience
questions about language creation
and language design.
So I'm going to
invite you to sit back,
enjoy a cup of strong Java
Sea, start offering responses and
insights, learned pearls of wisdom
and embrace. The Python program
makes it.
We'll start the celebration with a
question for Kito about principles
of language design.
You mentioned before, perhaps
somewhat jokingly, the Harry
Potter theory of language design.
What is this theory and what do you
see as the key principles of
language design?
I think you're good to me.
Am I good?
OK.
The Harry Potter theory of language
design was close to.
I do know that I cannot believe
that every detail
that J.K. Rowling puts on the first
Harry Potter book was
intended as.
Some important
Wolf point game
part 6 or 7.
And even if J.K.
Rowling was such a genius that
he hadn't actually owned land, that
and that was
who I think we found out the
FUTHI was.
But who won?
It was just like a temporary
diversion during the train ride.
And otherwise, you didn't hear much
about the rap with fingerprints
in languages.
I often.
That's exactly how things go.
You
you choose some detail
because you have to commit.
You sort of
you have to pick keywords.
You have to choose a style of
coding like you maybe
you choose indentation
instead of curly braces
or maybe you don't.
You're a special case,
but
whatever you do
in some way, you're stuck with them
and you find new
uses of that.
That detail that you picked
before you knew how important
that would be and
the sort of the craft of designing
the language is on one hand pick
your initial set of
choices so that
there are a lot
of possible continuations
of the story.
The other half of the
of the art of language design
is going back to your story
and
inventing creative ways
of continuing
it in a way that you had not.
So I think each of you have
languages that span multiple
decades.
So what are some of the principles
that made,
you know, so so
Javal would sort of on in the.
It didn't come out of like a
personal passion project or
something. It was.
From trying to build a prototype,
you know, I mean, we were trying to
understand it because the.
A lot of time talking to people
who build software or embedded
systems.
And you know, what was
it in the whole process?
How did their systems
fit into the universe?
It wasn't because I was trying
to worry when we were worrying about
things outside of data centers.
This was a project that had about
a dozen people on it and
my little.
Yeah, but it was my
my little piece was
what it was was sort of like.
You know, we we we we sort of
figured out that part of the problem
was that.
See has issues.
And and
so I started out so.
So out of this
like large pie of a project,
my slice
was.
To make things a little easier
from a programing language point of
view and fix the
pain points that came from the
programing language part.
And it started out as
kind of do a better see.
And then it and it
got out of control.
The rest of the project
really ended up just providing
context.
You know, the only thing out of that
project that survived was
was Java.
But but but the fact that it was
sort of directed at a set of pain
points.
But it happened to be it, you
know, about
people who were living outside of
data centers and people who were.
Getting shredded by problems
with networking and security
and reliability.
They had to build things that
ran in hostile environments
like in the homes,
which in any home
with a child in it is a
it is a hostile environment.
Speaking of hostile environments,
feral.
What are some of the guiding
principles for designing for a
business?
I love you, Larry.
More and more coming
out of this.
A computer scientist.
So I sort of actively
ignored some of the computer
science literature of the time and
said, well, what can we just talk
together? One part of the brain will
work more like a natural language
instead of. But
instead of
putting on a
campus university campus and
deciding world, the walkways would
go, we're just going to see where
people want to walk.
And they put shortcuts in all those
places and know that more as a
network, not as a terribly
orthogonal or computer
science or mathematical thing.
And then that turned out to be
in the right place at the right time
for bootstrapping a
lot of the web
and.
It also got used a lot for system
administration and so
various principles that relate
to trying to
provide API eyes to everything.
I'm trying to be both a good text
processing language
linguistically, but also
a quick Google language.
Here's why it was.
Kind of very useful,
was hasty and there was text
and, you
know, database seconds that's that
needs.
And so it was in the right place at
the right time.
We were very fortunate to
have that time because
in the 90s it became very
stable, a lot of a lot of widespread
use. Lot of people were
you know, the language itself was
stabilizing in the form
that it was.
But there were a lot of issues
and salat.
And so in the year 2000,
we we took a step back
and and
and basically said, we're gonna
break everything he's breaking.
So we kind of did the same
thing.
You know, it's done the pipeline to
the step, except instead of breaking
a few things, we decided to
break everything here.
So we came up with a whole raft of
design principles and 50 years since
then.
By the way, forensics did come up
two years ago.
It's getting faster.
And it's
suddenly at the beginning we said we
were going to do something
impossible and and
fail at it could be a very big
failure. And so far, this proved
me to be that. But in the course
of the fail.
Yeah. In the course of
that, we came up some really
interesting list of about 60
different design principles.
When read, even though I think many
of them have already, you know,
you know, kill two birds with one
stone, pick the right people, you
know.
It's possible like that.
But we came up with some cute ones,
like, you think that's cute today?
Oh, oh,
know.
Conserve your brackets because
SFE, even Unicode does not have
enough brackets
that don't reinvent object
orientation queerly,
which arguably provided
no substitute strong features
for weak buttons, late binding
sometimes oposite programs be.
But some of the major ones are,
you know, a lot of the stuff is
just perfect to screw over time.
And, you know,
there were a lot of weird magical
variables I'm going
to.
And so.
A great deal of the redesign was to
say, OK, what is the right peg
to hang everything on?
Is it off to Korea?
Is it something in the works
for school or in a larger school?
Or what
is the right to have each
piece of information on?
And if we don't have that thing, how
do we create it?
Great question.
And since it's such a great
question, Anderson, the spot
and Terrence Parr
had a quiz about while
programmers value simplicity,
they more often value
powerful functionality.
An amazing one liners
incurring the cost of complexity.
So for express.
Yes.
So what are your thoughts about
simplicity versus complexity
and some of the principles that
might guide you, as you know?
Really?
Suppose I.
I was always late
in doing the language, saying
that I've done.
Always tried to
make it so that there was only one
way.
So a lot of languages have
four different ways of doing
something and you pick the wrong
one. And then only
later you realize you went down the
wrong branch and now you've got it
back up.
And so.
So it's not
it's not always easy.
And I think there's like
often we're guilty of creating
what I call
this thing I call simplex.
Take something from blacks,
you grab a single wrapper on
top of it. That's make the
complexity go away, but you're
really creating is simplicity.
You know, it's just like a
bad abstraction on top of
another bad abstraction that is
simpler.
So I don't
know. I mean, it's it's
we think that as picking up correct
default overly complex thing.
Yeah. But but I mean,
the thing about that, about language
design is like like any any decision
you have to live with forever.
I mean that and in languages
you you can always add,
but you can never take away.
And so you've got to actually, as a
language sign up to be very
judicious.
About reasoning over not
so much what to put in, but what not
to put it, an army
because people come to you all the
time. Wouldn't it be great if you
could do this with that?
Are you going to?
Well, yeah, but you can't
fundamentally change the nature of
the beast. If you created an
empirical and an
imperative programing language, you
can't turn it into a functional
program.
Show me you can you can borrow from
functional programing.
But it is what it is.
And you gotta stay true to the
nature of the beast, or you gotta
create a new beast
so-to-speak.
Right.
Any other thoughts?
Excuse me?
Can we interrupt you or you may have
to interrupt any time.
So.
This is sort
of the point about what what
do you leave out?
And the what I
remember in
the early days of Python's design,
there were so many people
who thought they had a good idea.
Is sufficiently critical
to say no.
And so there are a few
things that
didn't work out at the time,
I I haven't learned to
say no.
And I quickly enough
did learn to say no.
And I sort of felt
like several lines
of defense. Like the first line of
defense is, hey,
you think you need a new language
feature, but actually you can
already write that typo
if you needed the locked right to
function or a module.
Well, if they say, yeah, but
everybody needs that.
Well nowadays we say put it on the
package repository in those
days. I said well maybe
you can propose a new standard
library module.
That's a lot cheaper for the
language design than the
new language feature.
And
another line of defense was,
well, you can actually write
extensions in C
or Fortran if you really care to.
And you can help yourself that you
can modify the behavior of
the language in ways that
aren't accessible when you just
write the pure language.
But you can still
sort of you can extend
it in a way that doesn't
fundamentally alter
the core language.
And if you've tried all those
things and and you failed,
then maybe you could
argue for, well, you have to change
something in the core language.
Hi, I'm interrupting.
I find that
whenever I get feedback on
whatever whatever it is, program
makers, I've been working on it.
It's people come to
you with a with a particular
instance of a problem.
And it's your job as a language
assignment to tease out the class
problem they're talking about
and then try to understand whether
there is a feature there underneath
that you could put in place
that is broadly applicable,
not just to that one crawl.
You're putting in place a class,
not an instance suit.
So that damn slide.
And if all you're talking about is
an instance, then you're probably
better off.
Save your money for power.
Actually found this.
In the early design of the Perl 6,
we asked our CS I expected.
Since we got 361,
so we have this in spades
lately.
And, you know, it's completely
overwhelming.
Until I
hit upon this principle,
which Anderson alluded to,
which is basically a lot of the
proposed solution.
Yeah, but there is a pain point
underneath.
And if you look at more enough of
these RFD and they haven't
seen pain point, there is something
you should address.
There's some fundamental unification
you should do underneath or
something that is is
clunky that could be fixed.
And especially if you're doing a
complete redesign that you can think
about the sort of.
To fix it.
How do you know?
There were a lot of problems
where.
Difference that just
won a victory with themselves.
You get like 40 different.
Released.
It was really clear in the way
that this was like a big
issue and
you feel dry and I came
about as close to spilling blood
on this topic as I've
got.
And, you know, I would
much rather.
Do something
much, rather leave something out
there, do something stupid.
One of our principals planned to
visit Margaret later.
Yeah. Well, well,
what that means is that that means
the opening answer is no.
No.
Right.
And one of the things that happened
with like a whole bunch of different
outfits and their job
was that they kind of turned into
competitions
and generics
and closer to work both.
Probably the
most hard fought competition.
People were writing pretty steep
pieces on the topic.
And I was like trying them all out.
I mean, some had no shortage
of smart people at the time, but
it's really hard to be
a planet full
of grad students,
even grad students.
At some point, I think most kids who
were in grad school.
That's correct.
And in linguistics and linguistics.
But it's.
Oh, probably
20, 30 years ago to say
I'm going to write my own language.
And people are very different.
Back then, the
Internet was sort
of starting.
Maybe not that they're single.
I think we have computers.
We have cell phones.
Nobody cared, but nobody
cared. What's all that about?
Nobody cared what you did with the
eighth that.
Decades.
But these are languages
that persisted.
Many changes and
they're on different hardware.
When you started
designing your language, what
was the key goal that you were
trying to meet versus
using some other extinguishment?
Well, I mean, for me, it's
never been people.
And one of the secrets of success
is try to solve as
many problems at once as you can.
And, you know, if there's just
one problem, there's probably
an easier way.
Right.
You think that way you'll never
have a new program.
Well, there's always a better
solution in the 300.
Well, it depends on how much
you pay.
Chasing down memory,
corruption.
But
the three virtues of the program
are. Blasi This impatience
and cupids
takes Kupers.
The world needs another program
like.
Is that a code?
But the thing about programing
language is that I think a lot of
people don't realize that every
programing language is about
90 percent the same
and maybe 10 percent
if you're lucky.
And a lot of people get very focused
on the 10 percent new and forget
about the 90 percent of the same.
That makes it at great length.
Right.
I mean, there's a lot of hard
or you work in creating programing
language, loss, semantics that
it's got to worry about.
And like everyone and loves
to talk about syntax
and syntax is the easy part.
Semantics is the hard part.
You know, like how do the types of
work and one of one only dogbone
supported promotions and one of the
different kinds of type constructors
that the language, as etc.
said are these are the hard things
to do to design.
But, but but not the things that
people people love to bike
shed on the syntax, you know,
shouldn't be a colon or or
comma.
You know, it's like, oh my God,
it's have a long thread about that.
So talking about
people having opinions and
syntax and
typing.
These languages don't all
take the same approach to typing.
Maybe we'll start with veto
and talk about typing in
Python and then
kind of work our way around.
I mean, I just
remember that when
Pyfrom first happened,
it was not a class.
It was a little conversion function.
There was an internal
object type, which was really
just kind of a Zite table
that represented integer objects.
And there was a built in function
if you needed to convert the string
to an integer and that
was we had a bunch of those
functions
and we realized that we
we had made a mistake.
We had given users classes
that were
different from the built in
object types.
And for a long time, it was like,
oh, well, like the
real stuff is implemented
in C and the user
writes a little bit of blue top
of that. And when
when I found out that we had 80
different competing web frameworks,
it was sort of time to
to realize that people were writing
much larger programs.
And that's a different approach.
Two types was needed.
And that's where we sort of
reinvented the whole approach
to types in Python.
And there was a bunch of cleanup
that didn't happen until 5 3,
actually.
But one of the things we introduced
and we were lucky that
there weren't actually despite those
80 web frameworks, there weren't
enough users that
we were completely stymied by
backwards compatibility.
Yet like we are now.
So we just one day we changed
the function into
a designated for the class.
And sort of
followed that calling, the class
would be constructing
an instance of the class
so that if you had simple
code that wrote in
left brand some expression right.
And would work exactly the same way
that we have the same effect.
But the workings
inside were completely different.
There was one particular file
that's sort of
implemented the
that's sort of the basic
functionality of types in the
language and it
in for one to it was like 50
lines of code.
And at some point I rewrote
it and it was five thousand by.
That's great.
What about Titus in Dublin?
I got this this this one
history of caring about things
like.
Building robot software
often that that
that comes out about, you know, I'm
much more worried about
what it takes to
build production quality software
than about what it takes, just like
you like a quick thing
and chuckles not a great language
for.
Things, but it's it's
OK, it's not
for me. One of the one of the things
that I love to do and
maybe I'm weird, but
being able to do automatic or
improving on hunks of cup
and and.
Type system is
a really great place
to be, one of the foundations
there begin they're improving
it for.
Four months of code turns out to be
really useful for things like
building optimized.
And doing it
ahead of time.
To be able to hear
improvable way as many
things as possible, so
satellite like like,
you know, one of the not well-known
things about about Java is
that, you know, in the jobless pack,
you know, it says Ouray, subscript
checking is always on.
But, you know, it's only
conceptually all of his all
right. But the truth is
that there are there's more than on
my books or
the compiler
to improve away
almost all index checks.
And same thing with like null
pointer checks and all kinds of
things that look
like they're heavy weight,
but they're really cheap,
you know, so it's a one of the
things that I like.
I really cared about it.
The time was that A plus
B should almost always be
at most one instruction
bonus points for zero instructions.
What about after?
Well, the thing about zero
instructions is often you can like
fold them into some weird addressing
mode.
Right.
And.
And so
in kind of the universe, I'm
right, I tend to live.
Being able to look
at A plus B
and realize it's
that destruction that all
feeds off of the type system.
And sometimes you can you
can do this with sort of optimistic
just-in-time coupon compilation,
depending on how far you want to
push that. So like the
the JavaScript engine
in Chrome is
is absolutely astonishing
for the the
kind of core that they go
through too optimistically.
JavaScript code, but
it's also very hard to do those
kinds of tricks if you're trying
to get into smaller
devices.
So, you know, there are
there are Java compilers that
work for machines that only have
like.
You know, to do that kind of compact
distillation, you need every
kind of hope that gives you
every little every last
drop of information.
And the earlier, you
know, what better job you can do.
Right. So speaking
of lots of information that one
gets, typescript
gives you a lot of flexibility
and power.
What's your general view that
typing?
Well, let me actually it's funny
that you mention
cycles and counting.
How many? And whenever I do, I
remember when I wrote Turbo Pascal,
which was all written in C-A-T
assembly code.
And back in those days,
you could literally look up the
intel manual on the sidewalk
or whatever, you know, and see how
many clock cycles every construction
took. And actually it would work out
just like that.
I remember now
everything takes zero clock
cycles except when it takes a
thousand clocks.
The memory and it is absolutely
impossible.
The reason about what I've seen you
use execute your code today.
That that's just one.
Well, it's not impossible,
but it's much harder.
Yeah, it is a complete pain in
the ass.
And they don't give
you manuals.
Not good at all.
You don't want to actually
understand that.
If you need to get the chip
diagrams.
But but with respect to types,
I've always worked on
programing languages that have type
systems.
But it's interesting how
it's gone from being type systems
far
for the code generators sake or
type systems for four
for, you know, generating
errors too.
Now I almost view type
systems as as a tooling
feature, and that's really sort of
the thing that has been interesting.
High automate for typescript.
It is, you know,
first of all, starting with a
dynamically typed programing
language like JavaScript and then
trying to add a type system on top
of it that
that faithfully reflects the
semantics of the programing
language.
And the reason for doing it is
actually not because we think type
systems are interesting, but because
if you think about what it is
that powers programmer productivity
today, like everyone loves their
I.T. like.
Whatever you're using, I hope it's
Visual Studio code.
But putting that if it's
not, you know, I am sure
you're all like accustomed to things
like state completion and
refactoring code navigation
and go to definition and so forth.
And if you think about it, the
things that the thing that powers
that is semantic knowledge
of your code. And the thing that
provides the semantic knowledge of
your code is a compiler
with a type system.
And once you add types,
you can actually dramatically
increase productivity, which
in some ways seems counter
counter intuitive.
Right.
I thought like dynamic languages
were easier to
to to approach because you got
rid of the types which was like a
bother all the time.
Well, look, when it turns out that
you can actually be more productive
by by adding types if
you do it in a non-intrusive manner
and if you work hard on doing
good type inference and so forth.
So, so,
so, so, so, so.
So I want to jump in here.
And then I take
over.
So I really, really, really
believe in that point in the in the
in the power tools
for power geeks.
And one of the things that drives
me nuts is
the real man usvi
movement.
And, you know, it's it's really
I just want to punch people who
are.
But I'm really inside state.
I I'm a real developer because
I use v.i.
And it's like, you know,
I do it the hard way.
I think.
I think I make language developers
lazy.
IBRD Let me get a lot
more done a lot faster,
OK? I mean, I'm not I
I mean, I'm really
not into proving my manhood.
I'm good
at getting things done.
Case in point, but I
take the devil's advocate here first
said he meant something like.
Yeah, but
you their notebooks, a lot
of science people.
Data scientists get a lot done.
It's actually a pretty simplistic
I need
a dynamic language.
Most of the time.
So you could get a lot more than
that.
I don't know.
No, but I think typeset.
I mean, it's not just
a type system can help you.
First of all, if you're uninitiated
and you want to know here, here's my
food and now I say food dot and
then the ivy can show you.
What can I type next?
Right. As opposed to I gotta go read
manuals and figure it out or know
it. All right. I mean, your original
developer of whatever piece of code
might know it all, but
then people move
on and new people come in.
You know, there's here's this
project.
There was there was no documentation
written about it.
And if you think about it, types or
documentation to write, I
mean, and then there just there's
so many things about
like
like adding them that
down the line give you
increased productivity.
So there's productivity
and then that's that's
maintainability.
Oh, well both.
And maybe
any different thoughts about how
you get to talk about types.
Well, talk.
The colonel types out.
Well, that story is very
different for profile purposes.
As you know, Girlfight, to sort of
rural over time and the whole idea
was sort of particularly idea.
Everything you can pretend
everything is a straight even if
it's a number or floating point
internally, it's stalled, you
know, interchangeable.
And that works out for
bootstrapping people into a
language. They're quite nicely.
And it's it's a feature that we
wanted to keep in Perl 6.
But what we discovered in Perl 5 is
part of the redesign was
it's it's fine if the
user is confused about the
interchangeability to tell more for
the Muslim to
take the care of
your standard.
Tikes But it's not so
good if the computer is
confused about.
You know, for all the
girl wanted, it was written way
back in the dark ages.
You had a schuberg, a bunch of stuff
in, and it
cheated a lot.
So part of the redesign
when we did girls school Perl 6
thing we wanted to do
object oriented programing
that is that these languages and
we wanted to be functional
programing that are the most
functional programing languages.
To do that you have to have a
fundamental very sound type
system of a sound object
model underneath.
And you really have
to take seriously these slogans
like everything is an object.
Everything is like closure.
Every feel the process,
even blocks are closures.
And he has got to
optimize. Hard to get up, get them
away from there.
But but I I also
agree with this idea
that the tikes also
are cultural.
I talked about Pei's hanging things
on pace. They're one of the one of
the picks. We didn't have something
to hang on the prettified.
And now we we can Pangle.
But all of that information
and then just run a little program
there. And then you have to have an
idea. They say, well, this object.
You know what methods.
But what you know, they could do
their own introspection.
The whole thing.
And people just you know, I'm
baffled by the way we do also
have an idea.
Good points all around.
So most
of the time programmers actually
spend maintaining versus
writing new code
out in the wild and.
What things or elements of a
programing language make it
easier to maintain?
And maybe we'll start with Fito.
Well, I found that.
TypeScript
is actually incredibly useful,
and so we're adding a very similar
idea to Python, adding it
in a slightly good way because.
We are taxed.
All right.
Go.
Anyway,
we have time.
I sort of
learned a painful lesson
of that before school programs.
Seafair dynamic typing
is great for large programs.
You have to
have a more disciplined
approach and it helps if the
language actually
gives you that.
It's rather than telling you,
well, you can do whatever you want.
Yeah, yeah.
That was part of our scale up
idea for Perl 6,
the typist would help
with programing in large because
we didn't notice those limitations.
One year ago, I started working
really heavily on Unbury
Factoring In.
And,
you know, being able to
do like large scale refactoring
is unlike millions of lines
of code at once,
that really changes the way you
think about maintaining code.
Because, you know, the world is
filled with libraries that have
things like stupid variable
names, stupid method
names, because,
you know, when you started out, it
meant one thing.
But now you realize that
you really didn't really understand
what you were doing in the
beginning. And so this this
method name really should be
different.
But nobody ever Reding's
methods because it's really
hard to go over a piece
of code and
rename. Exactly.
That's the right variable.
But if you've got a good refactoring
engine, you just you
just type, you know, medic control
are typing the new name,
you know, hundreds and hundreds of
files later, which takes about,
you know, maybe 30 seconds
if it's a lot of files.
You're done.
And so you basically be right.
Seven-part series,
I
hope this is this is actually like
you're describing, that's what
we what.
What was the genesis
of the typescript project, which was
these enormous JavaScript code basis
that we were seeing customers.
Right. And then in-house projects
that they were getting bigger and
bigger because JavaScript engines
were getting good enough for you to
write really big programs.
But maintaining them was impossible
because it turned into write
only code. You know, you do dare
not touch it. Once you've written it
because it worked then and then.
But, you know, there's this property
called text.
And I really want to change it to be
like some
other name, except there
is like a million other properties
called text. And if I'd just like to
do a global search and replace for
tax, then oh my God, it's like at
all. So I can't change anything.
But if you have semantic
understanding up like this property
call text is different from that
other property over here.
Call text. And if you want to rename
this one, that doesn't mean you want
to rename that one.
But but that takes
for something like a
type system to be in place.
And, you know, once you start adding
that, you add documentation to the
code and you add these capabilities
where we're now seeing people
like with regularity, refactor
one hundreds of thousands of lines
of JavaScript code, you know, we'd
like ten minutes
and end it and it just works
afterwards. And people are like
amazed that it's possible.
But but but
it's true. Said it takes a bit more
work to begin with.
And it's not maybe not right.
If you're writing five lines of code
that maybe more bother than you
really care to.
But but, you know, it started to
pay off pretty quickly.
There are different types
of really good lexical scoping
helps with refactoring.
It gets
back into this.
What's the right pick to hang the
sign up and off and it's slope.
It's a lexically skulked or
dynamically scale.
So now we're doing those right
and not interfering with threading.
So I have one more question
now before the break in
three minutes and we made
sort of a reference to Donald New,
one of the turning winners
in this last
section of conversation.
And he wrote, Premature
optimization is the root of all
evil.
So what's your approach
to optimizing code and gaining
efficiency, saying Python?
Well, I I'm terrible at that.
So I leave it to others.
That is
a very wise language creator
and they've lived up to
the task.
Piceance hash table implementation
has been rewritten so many times.
I don't understand any part of it,
but it is so much better than the
thing I actually copied out of truth
30 years ago.
Happy to have a clue.
Okey doke.
I kind of 50 percent believe that
because they're, you
know, the premature optimization in
terms of algorithms and code.
That part of it, I believe.
But people
often don't really think about the
role of data structures
in optimization
and interpret data structures
exposed.
You have to
know and you decide that, you know,
this algorithm is a problem.
But, you know, the reason that it's
a problem is because,
you know, this data structure was
just slapped together and they
thought, oh, they'd only ever be
like 10 items in the list
or 10 items in the set.
And then and then you start,
you know, having, you know, million
eight million items sets all the
time.
And all of a sudden, you know,
you're a little linkedlist
is. And that is not gonna happen.
Right.
Ex-directory or a unit
or. Yeah.
And and
so and so if you can you know,
it's like you know hyd
early hide.
Often.
Right.
Never tell the truth about what your
data structures are.
And on that note, we're
going to take
a quick look.
I just want to say that I
think like
with anything, the important thing
is to make sure that you actually
have the right data before
you you start optimizing.
Right. By too often you have
a hunch that, oh,
I think finally I need to do
this.
And I need to change this data
structure from being a linkedlist to
being overweight or whatever.
But but if you
measure, then you discover it
doesn't matter.
And but really, there's this other
thing that you haven't even thought
about that matters enormously.
And maybe you should go look over
there. So get perf.,
get it, use a profile or
figure out where it is, the time
actually spent.
I am continually surprised and
I write compilers for a living and
I'm always surprised by where
time is spent.
All right.
And that is that
we're out of time for this section.
We're going to take a quick 15
minute break.
And when we come
back, the really hard
questions are going to come out
because the audience questions
that have been submitted are
going to be the ones that believe in
you.
So thank you.
And teach in every one of you has a
community that is formed around
the languages that you've created.
I'm curious if you were talk two
ways in which you've seen the design
choices you've made for your
language, so shaping the communities
that are formed around.
It really helps.
Well, good.
It really helps
if you're trying to
make everybody look
what's here with your slogan here.
Everybody comfortable?
We're doing that right now.
They think they can make
all of all Americans, I heard.
You know, feel like comfortable
programing.
You see it for all.
Yes. To make sense of
it. I guess you know
what?
The sign was a clue.
It's not see us for all of us, just
Americans.
No. There are many underserved
populations in the world.
And what we've really discovered
that it really helps
build international
camaraderie and community
to have world class
literally support for unico.
Yes. I would encourage any language
designers out there.
Don't do this halfway stuff with,
you know, code points.
Go all the graphics.
I completely agree.
Kita, you had something you were
going to say.
I was trying to say.
I how my
design choices necessary
to make
choices about how to use
energy certainly have.
Did
I?
I was somehow a dude
with the importance of
user centered based something
because by comparison.
That was ABC long
lost,
its authors had a of things
right, and one of those was
listen to the users
asking users what they
think. And then again, you making
a new one of their suggested
solutions.
And you first figure
out what nobody spends.
You gave users a voice.
And I said,
take that back and let the
users help.
And now they're raising of.
I was going to say I always felt
like
it's important as a language society
that you don't create unnecessary
work for your community because it's
it's very easy to in the name
of purity or whatever.
Go change something
or or strive
for the perfect language.
And I've always said, like, I mean,
show me the perfect language and
I'll show you your language with no
use or shoot over.
Every every language
has its functions.
Has them because.
Because it has evolved.
And the hard part of language aside
is actually not version one.
It's like the older versions that
come after you
try to sneak things
in without actually
causing extra burdens on
people who don't necessarily care
about the things that you're trying
to sneak in. Right.
And so.
So that's the hard part
of language design, I think
is is the evolution
of the language and
keeping your community with you as
you have all.
Yeah. And so and so with with
Jarbawi like always
followed that we've
maybe been a little bit excessive
about it.
I mean, I've got binaries that
I compiled like
20 years ago,
but still run.
And and it's it's, you
know, on machines that were never
invented when the code was compiled.
And you only get there with
with crazy discipline
and and a a tolerance
for living with your mistakes.
But but it but it makes the
you.
It also help.
It also ends up selecting who
your users are
because in the in the Java universe,
pretty much everybody is is
really disciplined because,
you know, it's kind of like like
mountain climbing.
You know, you you don't
get there, get
sloppy with your gear when you're
mountain climbing
because it has a clear price.
And, you
know, when you you said
something about
Larry, you said it said something
about Unicode Java's had
Unicode since ninety two.
So, you know, it's,
you know, trying to be inclusive.
Yeah. And and that
really made a difference.
I mean lots of folks thought it was
like the lamest thing ever.
But
that was that that was during
my my, you know,
Lord of Java
phase which.
Yeah.
Yeah. But that that phase of my life
ended in about ninety five.
I'd like to say something
possibilitythat.
And that is we did this
perfect try to perfect
compatibility.
All the way through.
I didn't really
think.
That eventually runs into
the problem. But, you know, you
can't I can't fix your mistakes.
So one of the mistakes
that we made was was kind of a
mistake and that was assuming
that you had to always have
that kind of stability
and not change anything.
How would it be to design a language
where the language itself
could be evolved
from within
by the community
and the language we want?
Twenty five or 50 years from now,
this ties into what Polygram was
talking about, a hundred year
language. We kind of took that
seriously.
What is it that
prevents languages from evolving,
not being not having things still
thrive?
But
fundamentally, the Perl 6 compiler
is written in Perl 6.
Most the runtime system is written
in Perl 6.
The users can extend it.
Perl 6 itself does not care
whether things are built in or not.
It all works the same.
So most of the buildings are written
as if they were used or code.
So users, even if we say
no, we don't
want that language right now.
But put it in a module
you can do.
You can turn classes in two monitors
with about that much code.
You can put into implement actor
model classes with about about
how much code
you can you take.
Adding operators is just trivial.
When it does, it
does everything perfectly one pass
and drops into the sub compiler.
And with the end, it comes back out.
So there's never, ever
any ambiguity as to what language
you are in.
And so
because this scoping
of the exact language you're in is
always like if we scoped
any lexical scope can say
use whatever language I want a
feature version of Perl 6.
You could say use COBOL, use Python.
If someone actually people have
written Python parsers in
April 6, I don't think anybody's
going to call for sure yet,
but we'd like to think that, you
know, a lot of language
stuff like languages and Perl 6.
So I think that
I think the third module
of semantics would
likely.
But I think
there is a way us.
I think there is a way forward to
get the stability and
rehabilitation.
And I think.
Awesome.
Do we want to take another audience
question?
All right.
Thanks.
Can you talk into the mike like
you're eating the mike?
Hi. Yeah.
Can you hear me?
Yeah.
There's been a lot of talk tonight
about the evolve ability of
languages and
the trouble with implementing
things that might not be backwards
compatible.
What's something that you wish you
could have implemented with your
language? But for that, or
maybe another reason that wasn't
possible.
A
word,
right?
As all the
words
or these
or other forms of
naming is hard.
Well, I'll I'll I'll go.
I've. I mean I my favorite is always
like d that the two billion dollar
mistake of the
billion dollar mistake of having
Nall in the language.
And since JavaScript
has both null and undefined, it's
the two billion dollar mistake.
But
I mean if it did.
And I mean what's done is done
right. And and now now,
you know, I spend a significant
portion of my time actually working
on ways to
to make code null safe
to and who's
never who in here has ever had
a null pointer exception.
Right. There you go.
It's it is by far the most
problematic part of
language design. It it's a single
value that
that if only that wasn't there.
Imagine all the problems we wouldn't
have. Right. If if type systems
were designed that way and some type
systems are and some type systems
are getting there. But boy, trying
to retrofit that on top of a
type system that has normal in the
first place is
quite an undertaking.
The features I wanted to add were
negative features.
I think all of us as language
designers have borrowed
things.
You know, we all steal from each
other's languages all the time.
And and
it's often we steal good
things.
But for some reason, we also steal
bad things.
You know, like what?
Like regular expression syntax.
Oh, yeah.
I did that one.
Like the C precedence table.
OK. Another.
OK.
These are things that I could not
fix in four or five.
And we did fix it.
Burleson's.
Awesome.
All right.
We do tend to be doing pretty well
with the audience. So how would
another audience question?
Hi. Hello there.
So, well, what I wanted to ask
is you can sort of know what is
these sort of pendulum effect
in regards to tech and programing,
throw it out. Time
to Vinick's several different
paradigms.
There's a certain time where people
were like, are we going to do things
imperatively?
Are we going to go object oriented
or functional?
And for example, right now there's
a whole bunch of language used are
sort of like very aggressively
taking that standpoint of
being very pro,
being friendly with concurrency
or being bery
regardless of what immutability with
memory.
And I think that that kind of
pendulum effect happens
because technology has actually
been evolving throughout time.
Our machines are like beefier and
we have more memory now.
So that waste on we
design programing languages now
are probably a lot different than
there were 20 or 30 years
ago. So
considering that, where do you think
or how do you think the programing
languages of 10 years into the
future are going to look like?
Or in your opinion,
where where is language you design
headed to in the future?
So. So.
So my favorite candidate for that
is that, you
know, these, you know, major breaks
and things like that always happen
because, you know, something
major happens in the underlying
technology.
And, you know, one
of the areas
of underlying
technology that is kind of like
a computer that
I think is really underserved is
is writing code for GP use.
Right. I mean, right now there are
there are no languages
worth that crap.
And that's a technical for trademark
that work well
on GP use.
And, you know, maybe because there's
like a limited
number of algorithms that people are
willing to are really interested
in, but they're really important
ones.
Or maybe it's because they're
they're inherently all mathematical.
And the number of people who care
about writing numerical code
is small.
I'm one of those, though.
And you know, and so every now and
then, I spend time thinking about,
you know, what would you do to make
GPE you programing
really easy.
Yeah, but but but it's more than
just vector operators.
I mean that that's kind of my my
problem with the whole thing is that
most of these things are just
libraries of hand coded
assembly that do vector operators.
And and surely there's
something more clever than that.
Maybe I'll just add one with
language design. You know, one of
one of the things that's interesting,
you look at like all of us old
geezers sitting up here and there
they were, we're proof positive that
languages move slowly.
And I mean, it's not
you know, like
a lot of people make the mistake of
thinking that languages move at the
same speed as like
hardware or like all of the other
technologies that that that
we live with. But but
languages are much more like math
and much more like the human brain.
And, you know, and they all evolve
slowly. And we're still programing
and languages that were invented 50
years ago, like functional.
But all of the principles of
functional programing were thought
of more than 50 years ago.
I do think one of the things that
that is luckily happening is
that like as Larry said, everyone's
boring from everyone and languages
are becoming more multi paradigm.
Yeah, I think it's wrong to talk
about oh, I only
like object oriented programing
languages or I only like imperative
programing or functional programing.
I mean, it's important to
look at where's the research or
where the new where's the new
thinking and where where are new
paradigms that are interesting and
then try to try to incorporate them.
But do so tastefully
in a sense and and work them in to
work them into whatever is is there
already.
And and I think we're all learning
a lot from functional programing
languages these days.
I certainly feel like I am because
a lot of interesting research
has happened there.
But functional programing
is imperfect and no one
writes pure functional programs.
I mean because they they don't
exist. So it's all about
like how can you tastefully
sneak in mutation in
ways that you can better reason
about as opposed to
mutation and free threading for
everyone, you know?
And that's like just a
recipe for disaster.
Right.
So,
yes.
All languages are imperfect.
Let's just settle it right there.
You know.
Yes, we've been
thinking a lot about the
the the parallelism
concurrency issue.
This is one of those issues where we
were waiting to be smarter.
Uh, we we
did borrow.
I mean, steal a bunch of
ideas from Haskell
in terms of lazy lists and
things like that. But in
terms of how you actually
are going to deal with the end of
Moore's Law
or if not the end of Moore's Law, at
least, you know, multi, multi,
multiple C.P.S., many, many cores.
When you have a thousand cores, what
are you gonna do with them?
And so a lot of our
early design on Perl 6
was we didn't understand how
we wanted to do it yet, but
we knew very
we knew very deeply that we didn't
want to do anything. It would
prevent it.
So a lot of the early design
decisions were just saying, well,
we have to keep this open.
Then when the right smart people
came along, they said, look,
what you really have to look at is
things that are composed.
All threads are
not composed of, well, we can't take
two threads and turn it into a third
thread.
What you want is things like
we stole from go from.
We stole promises and channels
from C-sharp. We stole functional
reaction will programing.
And with these sort of primitives
which end up being duels of your
regular list processing kind of
primitives, they just happened to be
working on events.
And you're you can have loops, event
loops that were just like regular
loops that they're running on and
same control flow.
So that is easy to learn.
There are ways of sneaking these
things into a language,
at least in the ways that we
understand right now
that I heard.
Was it.
Who is talking about adding fibers
to their runtime?
I think you'd think it was a Java
news item,
but like lightweight threads that
can you, as Erlang has
done, has shown, you know, you can
run a hundred thousand threads in
your process.
That's another language that's been
around for a long.
Oh yeah. And we stole from them too.
Yeah.
Should we. We like their pattern
matching.
But one of the many therms is
that all of that language design is
theft of course.
Yeah. So yeah.
I mean we're thinking about it.
We don't know have all the answers
yet but
I think all these languages, you
know, long term tend to converge
on similar solutions.
So very sadly we are at
the last question.
I know you went so quickly
and unfortunately
all good things must end
except for maybe good languages.
So I'm going to start and
maybe quickly wrap up
as you look back over
the long lives of the languages
that you've written.
What have you found most rewarding?
The people?
The people by far
after the.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah. I mean, that that's what keeps
me coming back, that to work
everyday is like the incredible
excitement that
the community shows.
You and I I am so grateful
for all the people who
who have used that.
I mean, it there's nothing more
rewarding than have people
just like on Twitter or
wherever it is, go, oh, my God, this
is so great. And it's like, yeah,
that makes you want to just keep
doing more of it.
I mean.
Oh, yeah. You know, somebody comes
up to me in the street somewhere
and says, you know,
thanks for giving me a career.
Can I have a selfie?
You know, that's like this is
kind of like, you know, light and
dark thing.
But being this is really
wonderful.
This is all great.
I mean, I have to be in Silicon
Valley at a movie theater, the
tire shop.
Yeah. Well, what's really weird is
when you're when your kids are with
you when that happens.
But but, yes, it's.
It's when the when people say, you
gave me a career, you get my
livelihood.
You fed my family.
Yeah.
That's the best.
It's.
And you know, and
and not just.
And we're not talking about a star
relationship here.
Each of us to those individuals,
we're talking about the second
order, Community 2.0
kind of effects.
It's it's one
thing to see them, you know,
getting help from you.
It's another thing to see them
helping each other.
That's a whole whole level above
even the individual relationships.
I feel to see a community
that is learning how to love,
you know, kind of building a little
bit of heaven on earth.
There's just nothing like it.
Completely agree.
Kita, you get the last word.
And we love learning from you as
well.
And with that,
I want to say we've all
learned so much from all
of our wonderful panelists tonight.
I want to thank you for
allowing me to share and celebrate
this moment with you.
The little fifth grade kid in me
that was plinking away on basic at
Bell Labs who later
watch the P.C.
cell phone, Internet, Web and cloud
computing and change our world.
Never dreamed that I would be
chatting with four individuals
who profoundly impacted our world
by doing what they love, creating
and building languages.
Please join me in
a huge round of applause to thank
Anders
for inspiring this evening.
Thank you, Carol.
OK.
Was that epic?
So, Marina, I have an idea.
If you guys could step down right
here, we're going to get a giant
picture of everybody.
You guys stand right there.
We're going to get up here with your
camera.
All right. We're getting a picture
of everybody in that room.
All right. I need some excitement.
Oh, my God. I met my idol.
She can stand on the chair.
You can use my shoulder.
OK.
All right. Show some excitement,
people. Let's see it.
Monahan's.
Three times it's kinda weird and
lumpy.
OK,
thank you, everyone, for coming.
Thank you to all of our speakers.
Thank you to our organizers.
Let's do something equally awesome
next year.
And
if you want a robot there, 100
bucks. So come see me.